Citrix Hypervisor formely XenServer is redhat based. There is free distribution called CentOS, having much in common with redhat, if you get some skills with it, it will help you with transition, in case this turns out to be your way. XenServer is closed so you won't install any packages on top of it, xcp-ng will allow you doing it. Xen's xe api is in use to interact with the hypervisor, or querrying details, for the management apart from the API available products are: XenCenter, Admin Center (xcp-ng), XOA (xcp-ng)<.br>
Citrix ADC formely Netscaler is FreeBSD based. There is great online documentation for BSD, never the less on top of that there is logic produced by Citrix who bought this product if I'm not mistaken in 2005 from some skilled guy, who introduced the NetScaler engine. BSD knowledge may help you anyway, never the less there are quirks comming from Citrix ADC, it stands with binding, you will bind a lot of objects to make it work.<br>

It will be beneficial to get a bit of storage knowledge about lvm (logical volume manager), zfs (zettabyte file system) in case you plan to setup your own NAS (Network Attached Storage) for the homelab. In case you decide to stick with Microsoft world, Storage Spaces may become your friend (for this you'll need the DataCenter edition of the operating system if I'm not mixing things).<br>

Choice is yours as it goes for the hypervisor vendor. You may go nutanix way (smart way ;)), vmware (which is probably the most popular in the enterprises), hyper-v (here you have the free option Hyper-v Server, which can be managed remotelly with RSAT (Remote Server Administration Tools) or Windows Admin Center, or pure powershell / DSC). Bare in mind that if you decide to spend some time with MCS, you'll need SCVMM (System Centre Virtual Machine Manager), as there is no other way known to me, for the pure Hyper-V to consume the MCS API, like it is for other vendors mentioned above. There is also Proxmox, or KVM, but it seems there is no direct integration with Citrix for those. Those are great but the target and it's usecases is different.<br>
